[//]: # (This file was autogenerated from the man page with 'make README.md')

# carl(1) - Crypto Ancienne Resource Loader

Crypto Ancienne

```
carl [options] url
```


<a name="description"></a>

# Description

**carl**
is both a demonstration application for the Crypto Ancienne TLS library and a utility reminiscent of the much more comprehensive
**curl**(1),
of which its name is a desperate pun. It may also be more suitable as a
**curl**(1)
substitute for the older systems that Crypto Ancienne caters to, since
it has no prerequisites other than a compatible C compiler.

Like its inspiration,
**carl**
fetches URLs, emitting them to standard output. However,
**carl**
only supports HTTP and HTTPS (and only HTTP/0.9, HTTP/1.0 and HTTP/1.1), although it will also parse SOCKS URLs and use them as proxies (see
**ENVIRONMENT**).

**carl**
can also accept complete
HTTP and HTTPS requests over standard input (see
**PROXY**
**MODE**).
If connected to
**inetd**(8)
or a similar utility, this can act as a complete proxy solution, including for some browsers which may not speak HTTPS or
current TLS versions themselves but can be trained or tricked to send requests for
**https://**
URLs to it.


<a name="options"></a>

# Options

In general, options do not match
**curl**(1)'s.


* **-q**  
  Quiet mode; no verbose errors are displayed (see
  **EXIT**
  **STATUS**).
* **-t**  
  Disable timeouts. Otherwise, transactions that take longer than 10 seconds are aborted. Necessary for slower systems that may not negotiate TLS quickly enough.
* **-H**  
  Use
  **HEAD**
  as the request method instead of
  **GET**.
  In this mode, HTTP(S) headers are displayed automatically, along with any residual message body that may be transmitted by some servers. Other methods such as
  **POST**
  must be specified as proxy requests (i.e., sent over standard input when
  **-p**
  is specified).
* **-i**  
  Dump both headers and body, even if
  **-H**
  isn't specified. Irrelevant in proxy mode (when
  **-p**
  is specified).
* **-N**  
  Ignore the
  **ALL_PROXY**
  environment variable, if it exists (see
  **ENVIRONMENT**).
* **-u**  
  Treat all HTTP URLs as HTTPS, even if they are specified as HTTP. This includes URLs received in proxy mode (when
  **-p**
  is specified).
* **-s**  
  Downgrade HTTP/1.1 replies to HTTP/1.0 for consumers or clients which are intolerant. Irrelevant if headers are not displayed (i.e., without
  **-H**,
  **-p**
  or
  **-i**).
* **-p**  
  Enables proxy mode (see
  **PROXY**
  **MODE**).
  **-i**,
  **-q**,
  and
  **-H**,
  if they are specified, are ignored. If a URL is provided, it may only be a
  **socks://**
  or
  **socks5://**
  URL, which is used as a SOCKS proxy for
  **carl**
  to relay through (see the
  **ALL_PROXY**
  environment variable in
  **ENVIRONMENT**).
* **-v**  
  Display version string (the same as the main library).
* **-h**  
  Display a synopsis of these options.
  

<a name="proxy-mode"></a>

# Proxy Mode

If the
**-p**
option is specified,
**carl**
will accept a full proxy client request for an
**http://**
or
**https://**
URL from standard input. It must be formatted as a standard HTTP proxy request with method
and fully-specified URL minimally compliant to RFC 7230, though
**carl**
is tolerant, and will quietly adjust client requests as needed or requested (see also the
**-u**
and
**-s**
options). A full HTTP reply with all remote headers will be sent in response.

The request must be delimited by the standard two-CRLF separator. If the method is intended to send data to the server, such as
**POST**,
the payload may trail the request headers after it.
**carl**
does no encoding of this data; your application must do that itself.

In proxy mode, the _url_ argument may only be used to specify a SOCKS proxy through which the request will be forwarded. If the
**ALL_PROXY**
environment variable exists, specifying a SOCKS URL on the command line will override it (or use
**-N**
to ignore it; see
**ENVIRONMENT**).
Otherwise,
**carl**
will connect directly.

The
**CONNECT**
method is intentionally not implemented.

**carl**
does not bind any server port itself. However, because this mode accepts data on standard input, any
**inetd**(8)
or
**inetd**(8)-like
superserver environment such as
**xinetd**(8)
or
**micro_inetd**(1)
can be used to make it accessible on the network. _Careful: if you bind an external interface, you've just made your computer into an open HTTP proxy!_
**carl**
implements no access controls or authentication, so check your superserver's documentation on how to only bind an internal interface or the loopback.

<a name="environment"></a>

# Environment


* **ALL_PROXY**  
  **carl**
  has built-in SOCKSv4 client support. If a SOCKS URL (either
  **socks://**
  or
  **socks5://**,
  which is treated as a synonym) is specified in this environment variable, all requests will be forwarded through it.
  If a port number is not specified in the URL, it is assumed to be 1080. Any provided path or arguments are ignored.
  **carl**
  does not support authentication or SOCKSv5 features, and requires your DNS be able to resolve hostnames.
* This variable is ignored if
  **-N**
  is specified on the command line, and it is overridden in proxy mode
  (**-p**)
  if a SOCKS URL is specified on the command line.

**NO_PROXY**
is not currently implemented.

<a name="exit-status"></a>

# Exit Status

A possibly helpful message may also appear unless it is suppressed by
**-q**.
These exit return codes may be expanded in future versions.

* **0**
  No error.
* **1**
  The request is pathological (nonsense, inappropriate or incomplete). This can also occur when a non-SOCKS proxy is provided
  (**carl**
  does not talk to other HTTP proxies; they are vapid and uninteresting at parties).
* **2**
  The host or proxy host could not be resolved.
* **3**
  The host resolved to an IPv6 address, but
  **carl**
  doesn't support those yet.
* **4**
  The connection to the SOCKS proxy failed.
* **5**
  The connection to the HTTP(S) server failed.
* **6**
  The TLS response from the HTTPS server could not be processed.
* **253**
  No data was received.
* **254**
  Timeout. Consider using
  **-t**
  if the system is slower and the request should have worked.
* **255**
  General failure.
  

<a name="notes"></a>

# Notes

**carl**
does not currently evaluate certificates for validity, so its encryption support is best considered opportunistic and it
should not be used for high-security environments.


<a name="see-also"></a>

# See Also

**curl**(1)


<a name="home-page"></a>

# Home Page

https://github.com/classilla/cryanc


<a name="author"></a>

# Author

(C)2020-1 Cameron Kaiser and Contributors. All rights reserved. Additional copyrights apply; see the home page for full credits. BSD license.
